See if the microphone is working a second time.
Now off.
This is June the 9th.
Sitting in the splendidly orderly living room at 8.03 Dexter with Carl Landis.
Getting ready to chat with him about his years at Texas A&M.
Now turn the machine off and see if it's working.
Let's see.
Carl...
check about yours okay yes this is Carl Landis okay now we'll turn it off Carl L-A-N-D-I-S-S right and you said that you and your wife came here in 42 or were you single then no no George Bell and I had been married several years we had a little
girl who was in the first grade.
We came to A&M.
I started teaching at A&M for the spring semester of 1942-43.
So I came in February of 43.
But there wasn't a place.
College Station was very, very small.
And we had five military units from the Army, from the Navy, and from the Air Force all on the campus.
And they occupied, there were no apartments, not only an apartment in College Station, and there wasn't a place to bring the family down.
It wasn't until just about the last of April that I was able to bring the family down.
Now, Trace, give us a brief biological, biographical, I should say, summary of your life before that time.
Before that time?
Where did you grow up?
Where did you go to school?
Well, I was born in Tennessee.
And I'll tell you one thing that's gonna, not very many people have this.
A doctor came out from the county seat in a horse and buggy, 18 miles to deliver me.
I had an older brother who was three years older, but he died at birth.
So my dad had vowed that he would have a good doctor.
And so then I started school in Tennessee, a one room log schoolhouse.
And we talk about guns.
Two of the older boys always brought guns to school.
They hunt squirrels on the way home.
They have fresh meat because there's no way to keep beef or something like that, fresh meat.
And you could have pork, which was smoked and salted, but you couldn't keep fresh meat.
And so I went to school there.
Then my folks moved to Kansas City, Missouri.
I went to school in Kansas City, Missouri, in the Finnish elementary school, high school, then went to Abilene Christian for— Which high school in Kansas City?
Central.
At that time, Kansas City was a segregated town.
Then I started working in Kansas City during the summers as a playground instructor.
From that, when we graduated from Abilene Christian, that was in 1935.
Jobs were hard to come by, but I found a job at a little community of Sylvester, Texas.
I don't think it's any longer there.
There were 10 teachers, 14 teachers, 10 of us were brand new, never taught a day in our life.
And I found out why at the end of the first month.
In the first month, the high school principal who was distributing the checks gave me two pieces of paper.
This isn't 35.
And I said, why?
Half the check was good.
I could cash it.
The other half was a voucher.
There was no money there.
So I knew why there were ten teachers, ten new teachers.
What was your total income supposed to be if all of that had been good?
Ninety dollars a month.
Nine-oh.
Ninety.
And you taught what courses?
I was a principal of the high school, I mean of the junior high, of the elementary school.
I taught the sixth and the seventh grade.
They were in one room.
And I taught math and history and geography and things like that.
Then there was another teacher who came in and taught English and Texas history, because it was hard for me to pronounce cities like Waxahachie, Nacogdoches.
But there was the cutest little homemaking teacher just right across the hall.
I started teaching Texas history.
And when I come to one of those names that I couldn't pronounce, I'd run across the hall and say, George Bell, how do you pronounce, what's this?
And she'd tell me, I'd go back, you know, this is Nacogdoches.
But anyway, I traded very quickly with the teacher and I taught her math and she taught Texas history.
I was principal of the high school because the year of the elementary school, because the year before
We had kids in the seventh grade who were 14, 15, 1, 16 years old.
And the year before, they had sort of kind of run their principal off.
I was just out of college and thought I was pretty tough.
And finally, I was trying to be a kind of
you know, the father to son, but I was much older than they were.
And discipline got worse and worse.
Finally, I decided that the next one that I had to crawl down, I was going to paddle.
And you could paddle again legally.
And I had the strap that met all the specifications.
And so it was a 16-year-old boy.
So I had a teacher come in and observe it.
And he kind of flopped over the desk and with a smile on his face.
But the first lick, that smile come off.
On the third lick, he started crying.
And then I eased up.
But as soon as that was, as soon as he was through pedaling him, I put him outside on the playground.
And all the kids got quiet.
I didn't have too much discipline problems after that.
It was a very enjoyable year.
I met my wife at the first
And the first faculty meeting was social before school started.
And I saw a cute little gal over there, just a graduate of CIA.
And so I walked her home, which was about a block away down the gravel street.
And we sat in the porch swing out there.
And I've walked her home every day since.
All right, then from that.
From that, I moved to Kansas City, Missouri.
I got a job, I was offered a job in Kansas City, Missouri, teaching elementary physical education.
And I had five schools and I made those in a week, one day a week.
And then I showed teachers what to teach and they followed up on that.
And then I moved to junior high school, and then the high school, and I got to A&M.
My major prophet, Abilene Christian, was William Earl Dow, and he had joined the A&M faculty just the fall before.
So what was his last name?
Dow, D-O-W-E-L-L.
Did you know him?
I believe so.
And he was my major professor at Abilene Christian.
And so when an opening came up at mid-semester, he recommended me to Mr. Penberthy.
And Mr. Penberthy called me one night, it was about four below in Kansas City, and offered me a job at A&M.
So he hired me sight unseen.
But anyway, that was in January.
So when it came to the end of the semester when I could leave,
Then I left and I came to A&M and been here ever since, except.
I'm not going to ask you about compensation anymore.
What was your beginning salary here?
I believe it was $2,700 a year.
All right, and so you were.
That was 12 months because we worked 12 months.
So you were on the faculty from 1942 until you were.
No, 43, January, February of 43.
until you retired?
No, I took, at the end of the spring semester in 1944, I went to the Navy.
We had a Navy unit on board on the campus, and Merle Dow and I had gone over and applied for a commission.
We both received commissions.
And so at the end of the spring semester at A&M, we left to go into the Navy.
And then I came back to A&M in August of 46.
I've been here ever since.
When did you retire?
I retired in August of, August 31st, 1979.
79, okay.
All right, let's go back now to that first arrival.
Describe the campus and the community around it, if you recall it, when you, when you got here.
All right, the campus, of course, was very small then.
We had less than 4,000 students, but we had units of, as I said before, the Army, the Navy, and the Army Air Force, because it was Army Air Force then.
And the department, our main objective was you were getting men ready to go into combat.
That was the primary purpose.
Everyone took physical education four hours a week.
Fifth-year medical, I mean, fifth-year vet medicine students took physical, because everything was conditioning.
Waiting for the, and the Air Force, they left here, the Air Force trainees, we had those too in our physical education program.
They left here and went to San Antonio for flight school.
Now, were these service units
They were taking a physical education program.
What other kinds of courses were they taking?
Well, they were taking, I don't know just exactly.
I know that some of the units were taking first aid courses.
They were on other departments on campus.
I don't remember.
They were living in the dorms.
They were living in the dorms under strict military regime because they were in the military.
I know they took the engineering drawing division.
It was a little wooden building just south of what is it now, G. Raleigh White.
It was a wooden building, and I know a lot of them took engineering drawing.
I know that some of them took first aid.
And just what else they took, I'm not really familiar.
Their instructors, I'll call them, to use a generic term, some of them were A&M regular faculty members.
Yeah, most of them were regular A&M faculty members.
They just took courses in those departments that they wanted special training in.
How do you, as you recall them, what quality did they have as students?
Of course, the only students I had in contact with was the Army Air Force, and they were very select.
They were very select, and they wanted them in top physical condition, and we had those, and we had continuous calisthenics.
They come down in formation and left in formation.
Describe them in terms of age and attitude.
The attitude was very good because all of them wanted to get into flight school.
They wanted to go on to flight school.
But their age was, I would say, 20 in the early 20s.
Among the questions that I found that today's undergraduates ask and are surprised at the answer was,
They will have asked me, well, what did people think was going to be the result of World War II?
Who was going to win it?
Did you ever hear any of those young men doubt who was going to win the war?
I never heard anyone doubt who was going to win the war.
And you never, I've never known the patriotism that was here.
during World War II.
People hung a flag in the window, you know, a star in the window if they had someone in service.
And it was just, it was a feeling that is almost indescribable.
Were most of these young men from the Southwest geographically?
A lot of them were, but they were from all over the country.
Is that right?
Where did they, and you as a newcomer, where did you all go off campus for anything?
for food, for groceries?
We went to, well, George Bell wasn't able to come down until the latter part of April.
So I lived with the Dow's.
They had a spare bedroom and they put me in there and I ate with them.
And so I didn't do any grocery shopping.
But the only town that we went to was, I didn't have a car.
because George had kept the car, and was Southside.
There was the Southside Grocery, there was Medley Pharmacy, and there was a shoe shop up there, and the place would get your hair cut, and the cleaners.
And that was our shopping center.
Now, where did people go to church then?
I went to church at the Indian Church of Christ at the North Gate.
It was a beautiful building.
but didn't seat very many people.
About what was the size of the congregation?
There were probably about six or seven families and maybe 60 or 70, 80 students.
Now the other congregations that were nearby.
There was a Baptist, there was a Methodist, and there was a Catholic church, a small Catholic church down on what is now University Drive.
And there was a Presbyterian, the Presbyterians were out here, Episcopals out here.
They were here.
Any Lutheran yet?
They came in later.
That's what I thought.
Yes, they came in later.
There was a Lutheran church in town in Bryan.
When you traveled to or from during that time, how did you travel to or from Kansas City?
Well, I didn't travel to or from.
When I got down here,
Well, how'd you get here?
On a train.
I got off with the cottage station.
There was a lot of train traffic then.
You had all kinds of trains, and that concerns me now.
I talk about moving the tracks to the west campus, way over to the river.
We could so very easily come back to a period when there's a gasoline shortage, and we need those trains in here in town.
This is not part of it.
Well, and that's why the campus is where it is, because they put it on the track.
Right.
To get off at that college station, which is what they named it.
And when they built the highway, Tulane Highway, they tell me that they turned the campus around.
Yes.
So that it had both.
Yeah.
And now the airport triples it.
And I agree with you that to have those three possibilities is quite important.
And the students, they would line up at the East Gate along the highway there, and they'd put their bags down in line, and the first one would hitchhike, and he would find out about how many people we'd take, where he was going, and so forth.
And they'd all load in, and you know, you didn't worry about picking up hitchhikers then.
I have never talked to anyone either
the driver of the car that picked up an Aggie or vice versa, I have never heard a negative report.
Did you ever hear of any incidents?
Not any.
I have not heard of any.
No.
And they've all assured me that you didn't pull rank.
In the line.
Yeah, that's right.
That it was who was first in line.
Yes.
Let's see.
So you were here then for two or three months.
And then your wife came down in April?
Yes.
And then where did y'all find a place to live then?
We found a place at 301 Fairview.
It was a duplex and we had the downstairs.
And our daughters started to first grade at A&M Consolidated.
She had started school before she was six, and so she was pretty young.
And when she started reading, that gave her enough time to make friends before summer.
Then the school was out, and in the fall of 1944, when I left to go in the service, George Bell started teaching school at A&M Consolidated.
So she stayed here?
Oh, yes, she stayed here.
While you were away?
Yes.
At A&M Consolidate then, was there, do you remember, was there one first grade room or two or three?
That would tell us about how many students there were.
Well, there were two.
Two rooms.
And there were just wooden buildings over where the city conference center is now, just wooden buildings.
And the high school had one long hall go right down the middle with rooms on each side.
And George Bell was a homemaking teacher.
And so she had two rooms.
Then our daughter was in second grade or third grade.
And her room was just right over 20, 30 yards away from where Carol went when George Bell was teaching.
So she could come over after school and then ride to school with her mother and home with her mother.
So she wasn't away from her at all.
How was a newcomer yourself?
How did you feel you were received by other faculty and other people?
Oh, very, very warmly.
Yes.
It was kind of like A&M at that time.
A lot of the faculty lived on campus, and it was kind of like a family.
In the summertime, they would show movies at the Grove, and everybody would go down.
And Georgeville would clean up my daughter, Carolyn, put a nice clean dress on her and everything, go to the movie, down to the Grove, and the president would be there and everyone.
And Carolyn would buy a snow cone.
No time at all, it was all over her dress.
But you know, that's just a part of, and, but everybody got to know everybody.
And you knew their kids.
You knew their families.
Now, who was the president then?
T.O.
Walton.
Describe him to a new faculty member.
I really can't.
I didn't get to know him that well.
And I said president, I was the president who followed him.
Okay.
Did you get acquainted with Gilchrist?
Oh, yes.
Very good friend of Gilchrist.
Mr. Gilchrist was a man with a lot of foresight.
He was, I'm quite an admirer of Gibb Gilchrist.
And in fact, when he retired, he retired up here right on the corner.
But Mr. Gilchrist was, I remember one time when Blackford wanted to go to school here, that a lawyer came in with a person who wanted to enroll at A&M.
I just wanted to be sure it was going.
Okay.
And so the secretary came in and told him, Mr. Gilchrist, there's a lawyer here, and so this man wants to enroll in him.
Gil Gilchrist got on the phone.
He said, have him just wait just a minute.
He got on the phone and called Prairie View and had that president drive up here, and the president came in the back way as Prairie Instructions.
And then after the president got there, then Mr. Gilchrist opened the door and invited them to come in and said, now, here's the president of Prairie View.
You can go back down and register Prairie View.
This is the president that will enroll you.
So he was very, he was very effective, very good president.
Describe him physically.
I don't know.
Well, he was gray-haired and a little taller than I am.
Sense of humor?
Not really.
He was pretty business.
And I understand he was very much a College Station supporter as compared to the rival with Bryan.
Yes.
So was General Rutter.
Let's see.
No.
Yes, he was.
Because I was elected to, when I came back from service, I was elected to the city council.
And one evening, one night, we got a call.
They're having a call meeting of the city council.
At that time, we were a charter city.
We could not annex.
And word had got to him that Brian was going to envelop College Station.
We had a call meeting, and he had all of the meets and bounds and so forth all written out.
And we had a first reading on annexing land east and west.
And after we had our first reading on it, we had just got our city charter, and we just got our city, what do they call it?
We were operating under a charter, but we just got, we became a full-fledged city, able to do things.
I've forgotten the name of it now.
But anyway, we had that first reading, and that stopped Brian.
Were you at all around, do you remember,
when the students marched on his house?
Yes, I was here.
Share any recollection of that?
Well, I know they marched on his house.
And that was one of the reasons I think that they created a job of Chancellor.
But they didn't get anywhere with him.
Did he have, let's see, you said he didn't have much of a sense of humor.
I was going to ask you if you remembered any funny.
No, I don't really.
I knew him pretty well.
Who were the other, when you come back from the war, who were the other key people leading A&M?
Well, when I first came here, T.O.
Walton was president.
Dean Bolton was dean of the college.
We were a college then.
And Kyle was dean of the,
College of Agriculture.
I think McGee, I mean McNew was dean of the College of Engineering.
J.T.L.
McNew.
Meyer's dad.
Yes.
And Brooks was dean of the College of Arts and Sciences and the Graduate College.
Where did you and your colleagues and the
Were you in the, was there a Department of Physical Education?
No, yes.
And Mr. Penberthy, who, it might be interesting to know how he came to A&M.
Yes, tell about him.
The ex-Bible, when he was coaching here, hired Mr. Penberthy from Ohio State.
He'd just graduated with a degree in Physical Education, and he brought him down here to
develop an intramural program.
That would have been in the early 20s.
That would have been in the mid-20s, I guess.
26 around, I think, about then.
But then, anyway, so then Mr. Penberthy was, he developed a very good intramural program, an outstanding program.
And then in the 30s,
38 or somewhere along there, he developed the Department of Physical Education.
And I've looked at the offerings then, Army Recreation and a lot of courses like that.
When I came, no one had a doctorate degree in the program.
We didn't offer
really a degree.
We had required physical education, and we did offer a Bachelor of Science degree in physical education.
So that the typical graduate of the department became a high school?
A physical education teacher, yes.
Describe Mr. Penberthy as a person, and
and what it was to work with him.
Tremendous.
He was a tremendous individual.
And if he met you, he knew your name the next time.
You could stand out with the entrance to Kyle Field.
And as the students come back, almost everyone would speak to Penny, as he was known.
And he could call them by name.
He could tell himself about their family.
He was just an amazing person.
And the first dean of men was Mr. Penberthy.
They appointed him dean, and this Spike White is Director of Student Affairs, and I forget who was Director of Student Activities.
But- Now Spike came out of the department also?
Yes, Spike came out of the department.
What were Mr. Penberthy's, did he have anything that he really didn't like?
What were the things that really irked him and what really made him happy?
Loyalty would make him happy.
The good things made him happy.
Now, he was also, as I said, moved up to Dean of Men, and he was very good, but I remember he also wrote a column for
the battalion, Penny Serenade.
And at one time, we had a very, we had a losing season.
And we had a quarterback who was throwing a lot of incomplete passes.
And the student body booed.
I've never heard it before, I've never heard it since.
But they booed.
And Mr. Penny had an article in the paper, Penny Serenade, on that one thing.
He says, it doesn't take any courage
to stand up in the stands and boo.
But it says it takes courage to get down on the field and play, to officiate it or whatever.
And he had a real good column that he really took the Aggies to test.
I've never heard of boo since then.
That's good.
But he lost his job.
They brought him back into the department.
Oh.
I'd like to tell you why.
Please, go ahead.
It was over Kyle Field.
You know, we just had the lower bleachers and they were not built really for football bleachers.
We had the track built in there and the bleachers had a very low incline.
So if you were sitting up past the first row, even on the first row, you couldn't stand by standing on the track, you couldn't see the field.
they had to expand the facility.
So Mr. Penberthy said, let's take it across the tracks and start and build a football stadium, you know, with the proper incline of the seats and this sort of thing.
And he pushed for that.
And there's one board member on there that was really opposed it.
And so they locked horns because Mr. Penberthy was on the athletic board then.
chairman of the ethnic department.
And they locked horns.
And the next year, he was no longer dean.
I remember O.D.
Butler making the same proposal at an academic council meeting before we got ready to build the permanent second deck.
Yes.
And he was saying, let's abandon this outdated, go across the tracks, and build what is the equivalent of the first level of Rice Stadium.
It's about 40,000.
Then when we fill that, we can build one and then a first upper deck, then a second, then we can close in the end zone at one end at the second level and then third.
And according to him, we would then be at about 80,000 total capacity and all of them would be close to the field and at the right angle.
That was Mr. Penberthy's suggestion.
And next year he wasn't dean of students anymore.
And I can, I'm not going to identify the board member that was so damned about, you know, firing him.
Let's see, what was back in the late 40s as you began, came back from the war, what was your normal teaching load?
What courses and how many sections?
We had carried about 16 hours.
I taught both activity courses and I taught coaching basketball and teaching elementary physical education because I'd had that position in Kansas City and Missouri.
And then the rest of it was pretty well activities.
All right.
And so that your, what was a typical work day?
You got to the campus at about what time?
I get there before 8 o'clock.
were there till?
After five.
And where'd you eat lunch?
Did you come home, take your lunch?
We took our lunch sometimes, but until